Unofficial Translation

Monetary Policy
for 2023/24

Nepal Rastra Bank
Central Office
Baluwatar, Kathmandu
July 2023

Monetary Policy
for 2023/24

Delivered by
Governor Mr. Maha Prasad Adhikari
On
23 July 2023

Nepal Rastra Bank
Central Office
Baluwatar, Kathmandu

Nepal Rastra Bank

Central Office
Baluwatar, Kathmandu, Nepal
Phone: 01-4410158
Website: www.nrb.org.np

Table of Contents
Background........................................................................................................................ 1
Review of Monetary Policy for 2022/23........................................................................... 2
Economic and Monetary Targets................................................................................. 2
Monetary Management and Interest Rate.................................................................... 2
Sectoral Credit, Deprived Sector and Concessional Loan........................................... 3
Implementation Status of Major Regulatory Provisions of
Monetary Policy for 2022/23....................................................................................... 4
Macroeconomic Situation and Outlook........................................................................... 6
Global Economic Situation and Outlook..................................................................... 6
Domestic Economic Situation and Outlook................................................................ 7
Real Sector.......................................................................................................... 7
Inflation............................................................................................................... 9
External Sector.................................................................................................. 10
Government Finance......................................................................................... 11
Monetary and Financial Sector.......................................................................... 11
Monetary Policy Framework for 2023/24...................................................................... 12
Situation of Monetary Policy Stance......................................................................... 12
Monetary Policy Stance............................................................................................. 15
Monetary Policy Framework and Targets.................................................................. 15
Monetary Measures................................................................................................... 16
Financial Sector and Foreign Exchange Policies for 2023/24...................................... 16
Regulation and Supervision....................................................................................... 17
Microfinance.............................................................................................................. 19
Payment System........................................................................................................ 19
Foreign Exchange Management................................................................................ 20
Appendix-1: Projection of Monetary Survey ............................................................... 22
Appendix-2: Progress Matrix of Programs Provisioned in
Monetary Policy for 2022/23.................................................................... 23
List of Statistical Tables................................................................................................... 35

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 1

Monetary Policy for 2023/24
Background
1.

Monetary policy has been formulated with the major objectives of maintaining
price and balance of payments stability as specified in the Nepal Rastra Bank
Act, 2002. The policy statement also includes the financial sector, foreign
exchange management and payment system-related policies that aim to
enhance financial access, maintain financial stability and develop a secure,
healthy and sound payment system.

2.

The eleven months' data related to the macroeconomic and financial situation
of 2022/23 have already been published. The external sector and price situation
have improved while the government finance has been under pressure. The
growth of credit to the private sector has remained sluggish and the banking
system has witnessed a rise in the ratio of their non-performing loan as a
result of the slowdown in economic activities.

3.

Government of Nepal (GoN) unveiled annual budget for 2023/24 on 29th
May 2023. The budget has targeted to achieve 6 percent economic growth
and estimated inflation to be within 6.5 percent. The budget has stipulated
action plans for economic reforms to achieve these targets. The provincial
governments and most of the local bodies have also unveiled their respective
budgets for 2023/24. The implementation of the proposed reform programs
by the GoN and execution of the capital expenditure as planned in the budget
of the GoN and provincial governments is expected to further spur economic
activities.

4.

International Monetary Fund (IMF) has projected the global economic
growth to be weak in 2023 and some improvements in 2024. Despite some
improvements in 2023, the Fund has projected the global inflation still to
remain high. Though inflation in developed and emerging economies have
declined, but its level is still above the target. Therefore, these economies
have continued the tighter monetary policy stance.

5.

Monetary policy for 2023/24 along with policies related to regulatory, payment
system, and foreign exchange management have been formulated considering
the international and national economic as well as financial situation and their
outlook, policy stances adopted by developed and neighbouring economies,
the review of the monetary policy of 2022/23, the objectives and priorities

2

Nepal Rastra Bank

set out in the government budget for 2023/24 and suggestions received from
stakeholders, scholars, and the general public.

Review of Monetary Policy for 2022/23
Economic and Monetary Targets
6.

The stance of monetary policy for 2022/23 was guided by the objective of
keeping inflation below 7 percent. The average inflation up to mid-June 2023
stood at 7.77 percent while the year-on-year (y-o-y) inflation stood at 6.83
percent in mid-June 2023.

7.

The foreign exchange reserves available as of eleven months of 2022/23
remained sufficient to cover 9.6 months' imports of goods and services,
against the target of maintaining foreign exchange reserves sufficient to cover
7 months' imports of goods and services.

8.

The weighted average interbank rate, the operating target of the monetary
policy, was set to keep within the corridor of 5.5 percent to 8.5 percent. The
annual weighted average interbank rate recorded at 7.13 percent.

Monetary Management and Interest Rate
9.

A total liquidity of Rs.414.47 billion through the repo auction and Rs.89.70
billion through the outright purchase auction has been injected on transaction
basis in 2022/23 under the open market operation whereas a total liquidity
of Rs.108.20 billion has been mopped up through reverse repo and deposit
collection auction. On transaction basis, a total of Rs.395.97 billion net
liquidity has been injected through open market operations in 2022/23. A
total of Rs.472.30 billion net liquidity was injected in the previous fiscal year
under open market operations.

10.

Bank and Financial Institutions (BFIs), on transaction basis, have utilized
liquidity facilities worth Rs.2727.11 billion through standing liquidity facility
(SLF) and Rs.2286.90 billion through overnight liquidity facility (OLF)
in 2022/23. On transaction basis, the BFIs had utilized Rs.9170.10 billion
through the SLF in the previous fiscal year.

11.

Liquidity of Rs.712.50 billion has been injected in 2022/23 through the net
purchase of the US Dollar in the foreign exchange market. A total of Rs.355.56
billion liquidity was injected through the net purchase in the previous fiscal

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 3

year. The improvements in the remittance inflows and a fall in imports have
resulted in a higher volume of the net purchase of the US Dollar.
12.

Short-term interest rates have decreased in recent months following the
improvements in the external sector. The weighted average interbank rates
among commercial banks have continuously declined to 2.98 percent as in
mid-July 2023. The interbank rate was 6.99 percent in mid-July 2022 that
reached a peak of 8.5 percent in mid-October 2022. Similarly, the 91 day's
weighted average treasury bill rate declined to 6.14 percent in mid-July 2023.
The treasury bill rate remained 10.66 percent in mid-July 2022 after reaching
the peak of 10.89 percent in mid-January 2023.

13.

Long-term interest rates have also started to decline in line with short-term
interest rates. The base rate of commercial banks which increased to 10.91
percent in mid-January 2023 has fallen to 10.18 percent in mid-June 2023.
Similarly, the weighted average deposit rate that increased to 8.51 percent
in mid-January 2023 has declined to 7.99 percent in mid-June 2023. The
weighted average lending rate of commercial banks that reached as high as
13.03 percent in mid-February 2023 gradually declined to 12.53 percent in
mid-June 2023.

Sectoral Credit, Deprived Sector and Concessional Loan
14.

Out of the total lending of commercial banks, 13.1 percent (Rs.552.99 billion)
lending has been in the agriculture sector, 6.8 percent (Rs.286.77 billion) in the
energy sector and 9.9 percent (Rs.418.36 billion) in the micro, cottage, small
and medium enterprises sector in mid-June 2023. Likewise, development
banks have extended 24.9 percent (Rs.113.18 billion) and finance companies
extended 22.3 percent (Rs.19.65 billion loans) of their total outstanding loan
in the agriculture, micro, cottage, and small enterprises/businesses, energy,
and tourism sectors in mid-June 2023.

15.

The deprived sector lending stood at 6.1 percent (Rs.260.84 billion) on
average in the total outstanding loan of the commercial banks as of mid-June
2023. Similarly, development banks and finance companies have extended
9.1 percent (Rs.42.32 billion) and 6.1 percent (Rs.5.65 billion) of their
outstanding loan respectively.

16.

The concessional loan under the interest subsidy program of the GoN has
provided to 147 thousand 510 borrowers with an outstanding amount of

4

Nepal Rastra Bank

Rs.203.10 billion in mid-June 2023. The outstanding refinance facility
provided by the NRB in the productive sectors including agriculture, micro
enterprises, export and the Covid-19 hard-hit sectors remained Rs.1.96 billion
in mid-June 2023.

Implementation Status of Major Regulatory Provisions of Monetary Policy for 2022/23
17.

For strengthening monetary management and thereby improve liquidity
management, a provision of providing overnight liquidity facility (OLF)
to BFIs has been started since 16th December 2022. Similarly, a rule to
conduct open market operations (OMO) has been introduced so that OMO
interventions will take place if the weighted average interbank rate deviates
by the specified percentage point away from the policy rate.

18.

The existing monetary policy framework has been timely improved to make
effective liquidity management and thereby limit the volatility in interest rates,
reduce financial intermediation costs, and strengthen the monetary policy
transmission. Since 2022/23, a monetary policy rule has been introduced in
which the annual inflation target and the import capacity of the foreign exchange
reserves are taken as a basis for setting the policy rate. According to this rule,
the policy rate will be revised upward when there is pressure on inflation and
import capacity of foreign exchange reserves, and will be revised downward
when there is no pressure. With this rule, the process of setting the monetary
policy stance has now been both data and theory driven. This policy rule is
believed to make the setting of monetary policy stance more transparent and
make the policy more effective to maintain macroeconomic stability.

19.

As per the provisions in the monetary policy for 2022/23, a procedure for the
lender of the last resort facility has been issued. The procedure has made clear
provisions regarding the qualification of the related institutions, instruments,
and procedures to follow while using the lender of the last resort facility from
the NRB in case BFIs, though solvent in medium to long term, but are unable
to manage immediate short-term liquidity requirement.

20.

The existing provision of determining interest rates on lending has been
revised in 2022/23, so that lending rates can be set on a monthly basis as per
the cost of funds. It is expected to enhance the effectiveness of the monetary
policy transmission mechanism through bringing timely adjustment in the
demand for and supply of loanable funds.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 5

21.

A provision that commercial banks need to maintain average interest rate
spread of 4 percent has come into effect from mid-July 2023. Likewise, the
spread requirement for development banks and finance companies to keep at
or below 4.6 percent has also come into effect.

22.

A provision of allowing to add a maximum of 2 percentage points premium to
the base rate while determining the lending rate has come into implementation
for loans up to Rs.20 million provided to food production, animal husbandry,
fishery, export, as well as manufacturing industry, handicraft, and skill-based
businesses and enterprises with 100 percent local raw materials. Likewise,
an arrangement of adding a maximum of 2 percentage points premium to the
base rate has come into effect while providing credit to the private sector for
establishing information technology park and industrial park.

23.

The microfinance program has been helpful in developing skills and
entrepreneurship of the deprived people as well as promoting the microenterprises in addition to providing financial services. Access to financial
services of the deprived people has been enhanced further by the extension
of the micro-savings and credit products. This has not only provided the
opportunity to choose financial products but also minimized the risk for the
deprived people being exploited by informal finances. In order to make the
deprived sector lending further concessional, a provision of adding a maximum
of 2 percentage point premium to the base rate while providing wholesale
lending to the microfinance institutions has been brought into implementation.

24.

The Foreign Investment and Foreign Loan Management Bylaw 2021 has
been amended to further facilitate the receipt of foreign currency from foreign
investment, repatriation of foreign investment as well as earnings made from
that investment, approval and receipt of foreign loans and providing foreign
exchange facilities for the repayment of principal and interest of such loans,
among others.

25.

By issuing Nepal Rastra Bank Remittance Regulations, 2023, the issuance
of licenses for carrying out remittance transactions, regulation of remittance
transactions, and merger or acquisition of licensed remittance companies
have been further systematized.

26.

A provision has come into operation that BFIs and remittance companies can
bring remittances to the home country through cards issued in collaboration
with licensed payment system operators.

6

Nepal Rastra Bank

27.

A provision has come into place that a natural person or any firm, company,
or institution established in Nepal and exporting services to any foreign firm,
company, institution, or natural person could receive the convertible foreign
currency through the banking channel.

28.

The details of the implementation status of the policy provisions of the
Monetary Policy for 2022/23 are provided in Annex 2.

Macroeconomic Situation and Outlook
Global Economic Situation and Outlook
29.

The global economic growth rate has remained subdued due to a rise in
interest rates which was raised in response to the higher inflation caused by
the Russia-Ukraine war, rise in the price of petroleum products and global
supply disruption. International Monetary Fund (IMF) has projected a lower
economic growth rate for the world, advanced, and emerging economies in
2023 and a moderate improvement in 2024.

30.

According to the IMF’s projection of April 2023, the world economy which
expanded 3.4 percent in 2022 is estimated to grow 2.8 percent and 3 percent in
2023 and 2024 respectively. Advanced economies that expanded 2.7 percent
in 2022 is estimated to grow 1.3 percent in 2023 and 1.4 percent in 2024 as
per the IMF projection. Emerging and developing economies which grew 4
percent in 2022 is projected to expand 3.9 percent and 4.2 percent in 2023 and
2024 respectively.

31.

The neighbouring economies, India and China, are estimated to grow 5.9
percent and 5.2 percent respectively in 2023, compared to a growth of 6.8
percent and 3 percent respectively in 2022. The Fund projects economic
growth of 6.3 percent for India and 4.5 percent for China in 2024.

32.

The elevated inflationary situation faced by the global economy has been
gradually easing. However, the inflationary risk is continued on account
of uncertainties in energy prices, the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war and the
likelihood of adopting easy policy to overcome the economic recession.
As per the projection of the IMF, global inflation, which remained at 8.7
percent in 2022, is estimated to decrease to 7 percent in 2023 and further to
4.9 percent in 2024. Inflation of the developed and developing economies is
projected to be 4.7 percent and 8.6 percent respectively in 2023 and to decline

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 7

to 2.6 percent and 6.5 percent respectively in 2024, compared to 7.3 percent
for developed and 9.8 percent for developing economies in 2022.
33.

Most of the central banks around the world have been continuing their tighter
monetary policy stance since the beginning of 2022. The Federal Reserve
Bank of America has held off the rate hike in the last 14th June 2023 meeting,
while the rate was being continuously increased from 0-0.25 percent in
March 2022 to 5-5.25 percent on 3rd May 2023. Emerging economies have
also continued their tighter monetary policy stance to anchor the higher
inflationary expectation as well as evade the effects of tighter monetary policy
of advanced economies in their financial markets.

34.

The Reserve Bank of India, by continuously increasing the policy rates, has
set the repo rate at 6.5 percent and the standing liquidity facility rate at 6.75
percent in February 2023. RBI has, however, kept rates unchanged in the
review of monetary policy in June 2023. The Central Bank of Bangladesh has
increased the policy rates thereby setting repo rate at 6.5 percent, standing
liquidity facility rate at 8.5 percent and the standing deposit facility rate at 4.5
percent.

35.

The rise in the price of petroleum products, foods and metallic commodities
induced by the Russia-Ukraine war has currently remained stable or even
showed a declining trend. As a result, inflation is in a decreasing trend in most
of the world economies. However, most economies seem to continue their
tighter monetary policy stance in 2023 given the current inflation being above
their targeted level and the ongoing geopolitical tensions that pose risks to
fuel and the overall price situation.

Domestic Economic Situation and Outlook
Real Sector
36.

National Statistics Office (NSO) has estimated economic growth of 2.16
percent at the basic price and 1.86 percent at the producer's price for 2022/23.
Internal liquidity absorption due to the higher balance of payments (BoP)
deficit in the previous year and capital expenditure being less than the budget
allocation contributed to lower domestic demand which severely affected the
construction, mining and quarrying, manufacturing and wholesale and retail
trade sectors. These sectors are estimated to register a negative growth in
2022/23.

8

Nepal Rastra Bank

37.

The budget for 2023/24 has targeted economic growth of 6 percent. The GoN
has allocated Rs.302.07 billion for capital expenditure and the budget has
also outlined broader action plans for economic reforms. Similarly, provincial
governments have allocated Rs.159.49 billion for capital expenditure.
Execution of the proposed action plans for the economic reforms and execution
of capital budget as planned is expected to further stimulate the private sector
investment thereby helping to achieve the targeted economic growth.

38.

According to the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, about 53 percent of
paddy plantation has been completed as of 14 July 2023. About 65 percent of
paddy plantation was completed by July 14 last year. The paddy plantation
progress is less than last year due to the delay in the monsoon and lumpy skin
disease. Thousands of livestock’s have died due to the lumpy skin disease.
However, due to the active monsoon, easy availability of the chemical
fertilizer and timely fixation of the minimum support price of paddy by the
government that has removed the price uncertainty, the agricultural sector is
expected to register a satisfactory growth in 2023/24.

39.

About 900 MW of electricity is expected to add to the national grid system
in 2023/24. With the permission received to sell an additional 300MW
electricity to the Indian market on June 26, 2023, Nepal is now able to sell
a total of 952 megawatts of electricity in the Indian market. The increased
export of electricity will help to reduce the trade deficit with India and to
improve the external sector, thereby supporting the domestic economy to gain
further momentum.

40.

The tourist arrival improved since the beginning of 2022/23. Following
the reduced impact of COVID-19, international travel standards have been
eased and the business environment is becoming convenient. The GoN has
announced the 2023-2033 to be a Visit Nepal decade. The tourism-related
infrastructures like hotels, and airports have been expanded. As a result, a
continuous growth in the number of foreign tourist arrival and the further
expansion of the tourism sector in the coming years is expected.

41.

The construction and its interlinked sectors have contracted in 2022/23. To
help the construction sector gaining momentum which has a strong backwardforward linkage to wholesale and retail trade, mining and quarrying,
manufacturing, among others, it is necessary to make arrangement for timely
capital spending on the development activities like infrastructures. This will

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 9

further increase the private demand in other sectors and support achieving the
targeted economic growth.
42.

The declining trend of the interest rate following the external sector
improvements will support to increase private demand, and thereby expand
economic activities further. Remittance inflow is expected to remain
satisfactory due to the higher number of Nepali people who have gone for
foreign employment abroad. However, the emigration of Nepali youths
for employment and study abroad has contributed to some extent to lower
domestic demand.

Inflation
43.

The annual average consumer price inflation is expected to remain slightly
above the targeted level. The average consumer price inflation for eleven
months of 2022/23 is 7.77 percent, while such inflation was 6.18 percent
in the same period of 2021/22. However, the y-o-y consumer price inflation
registered 6.83 percent in mid-June 2023, being slightly below the average
annual expected inflation. The increase in the prices of cereals, dairy products,
spices, household consumables, imported goods, and fuel along with the
depreciation of Nepalese Rupees against the US Dollar has generated pressure
on inflation. However, the inflationary pressure seems to gradually ease in
response to subdued domestic demand and the declining trend of wholesale
price in India.

44.

Nepal’s consumer price inflation is primarily determined by domestic
production and demand, the price of imported goods, the exchange rate
of Nepalese Rupees and the margin to be marked up by wholesalers and
retailers. Expanding domestic production, setting the policy stance to balance
the demand and supply, and strengthening market regulation for checking
artificial price hikes are necessary to contain inflation within the targeted
level.

45.

In the inflation expectation survey conducted in mid-July 2023, public
expectation for inflation has remained stable for both next three months and
one-year ahead period.

46.

Inflationary pressure at the international level has been easing. However,
uncertainty of crude oil price and the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war still pose
risks to price. Considering the existing tighter monetary policy stance at the

10

Nepal Rastra Bank

global level, declining inflationary trend, well-anchored public's inflationary
expectation, and the base price effect, inflation is expected to remain within
6.5 percent in 2023/24.

External Sector
47.

Foreign trade has declined in 2022/23. During eleven months of the review
year, the total merchandise exports decreased 22.7 percent amounting
Rs.143.59 billion whereas merchandise imports decreased 16 percent
amounting Rs.1480.98 billion. As a result, the trade deficit has improved 15.2
percent to Rs.1337.39 billion in comparison to the previous year. Given the
size of the budget, the current trend of remittance inflows and the decreasing
trend in the interest rates, imports of goods and services is projected to grow
by about 16 percent in 2023/24.

48.

The BoP situation has improved in 2022/23. In the eleven months of 2022/23,
the BoP is in surplus of Rs.228.98 billion. However, the current account is in
deficit by Rs.69.40 billion. In the same period of the previous year, the BoP
was in deficit of Rs.269.81 billion and the current account was in deficit of
Rs.592.14 billion.

49.

Remittance inflows remained satisfactory in 2022/23 mainly due to elevated
level of Nepali youths going abroad for foreign employment in new
destinations and countries having higher income as well as because of the
incentives provided for inward remittance inflows. In the eleven months of
2022/23, remittance inflows increased 22.7 percent in Nepali Rupees and 13.0
percent in the US Dollar terms. Even if the number of Nepalese going abroad
for foreign employment is significant in post COVID-19 period, however, the
growth rate of remittance inflows in 2023/24 is expected to remain moderate
given the higher base of remittance inflows in 2022/23.

50.

Travel income increased 94.3 percent in 2022/23. Such income is estimated
to be at satisfactory level in 2023/24 also.

51.

The foreign exchange reserve is in a comfortable position. Gross foreign
exchange reserve increased 21.8 percent to Rs.1480.87 billion in mid-June
2023 in comparison to mid-July 2022. In the US Dollar terms, the gross foreign
exchange reserves increased 18.5 percent to Rs.11.30 billion. There is a risk
of downward pressure in foreign exchange reserves if growth of remittance
remains moderate but import grows significantly. Therefore, priorities should

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 11

be given to export and tourism promotion, foreign investment and remittance
inflows through formal channels for sustainable improvements in the external
sector.
52.

Considering the private sector credit growth, size of the budget and foreign
assistance, direction of foreign trade and the trend of remittances inflows,
current account deficit seems to widen. However, the BoP is estimated to
remain moderately surplus in 2023/24.

Government Finance
53.

According to the data of GoN, Ministry of Finance, Financial Comptroller
General Office, the total expenditure of the Nepal government increased 10.3
percent and total revenue mobilization decreased 10.4 percent in 2022/23
compared to 2021/22. Out of the total budget outlay recorded in 2022/23,
the share of the recurrent and capital expenditure were 70.35 percent and
16.34 percent respectively. Of the total budget allocation, 85 percent of
the recurrent expenditure and 61.4 percent of the capital expenditure were
realized respectively.

54.

The total revenue mobilization of the Nepal government was Rs.957.15
billion and the total expenditure realised was Rs.1429.56 billion in 2022/23.
These statistics show a revenue deficit of Rs.472.41 billion. Such a revenue
deficit was Rs.228.29 billion in the previous fiscal year.

55.

On the backdrop of the limited internal resources due mainly to low domestic
saving and not to crowd out private investment, the GoN has prioritized the
mobilization of external resources in the budget of 2023/24 to fill up the rising
revenue deficit. The recent improvements witnessed in the external sector as
well as in interest rates could be sustained if resource gap is managed through
foreign investment, foreign debt, and foreign assistance.

Monetary and Financial Sector
56.

The broad money supply increased 10.9 percent in mid-June 2023 on y-o-y
basis. During the period, the total deposit mobilised by the BFIs increased
12.2 percent and credit to the private sector increased 3 percent. The growth
projection for the broad money supply was 12 percent while for the credit to the
private sector was 12.6 percent for 2022/23. The demand for credit remained
subdued due to the lack of timely and planned turnout of the government's
capital expenditure, sluggish economic growth and rise in interest rate in

12

Nepal Rastra Bank

response to tighter liquidity condition. As a consequent, the credit expansion
remained low in 2022/23.
57.

The BFIs have mobilised a total deposit of Rs.88 billion from the remittance
receipt in the accounts opened by Nepali people working abroad. Out of this
total amount, 86.4 percent is held in fixed deposits.

58.

The outstanding credit to the private sector from BFIs is estimated to reach
Rs.4877 billion in mid-July 2023 or equal to 90.7 percent of the GDP. The
average credit-to-deposit ratio stands at 81.62 percent in mid-July 2023.

59.

The current trend of remittance inflows, improvements in the liquidity position,
declining trend of interest rates, proposed reform plans in the budget and the
turnout of the capital expenditure of the federal and provincial governments as
planned in the budget are expected to make economic activities buoyant and
raise the private sector demand for credit. Considering the potential demand
for credit and additional credit capacity of banks and financial institutions,
the credit to the private sector is projected to increase by up to Rs.562 billion
in 2023/24.

Monetary Policy Framework for 2023/24
Situation of Monetary Policy Stance
60.

Pressure on the external sector has subsided as a result of policy actions.
The BoP has been remaining surplus since mid-October 2022. The liquidity
situation in the banking sector has been easing along with the improvements
in the external sector. As a result, the short-term interest rates have decreased
and the long-term interest rates are in a declining trend. Thus, given the
improvements witnessed in external sector and liquidity situation, economic
activities are expected to expand. In the context of current account deficit and
higher import-to-GDP ratio, a strategy of managing the domestic demand that
spurs economic activities as well as preserves the achievements made so far
in the external sector has been adopted.

61.

Even if remittance inflow has increased the money supply, it has not been
contributing to value addition domestically, resulting in a wider gap between
the domestic production capacity and the demand. As a result, the current
account of the external sector is in deficit for the last few years. As Nepal
is following the fixed exchange rate regime, the persistence current account

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 13

deficit not only poses vulnerabilities to the external sector but also to the
domestic economic stability. Therefore, the monetary policy has been oriented
to focus on maintaining the overall macroeconomic stability by managing
the aggregate demand in a way that strikes proper balance between domestic
demand and supply.
62.

Nepal's potential output growth seems to be around 4.5 percent. An NRB
study shows that inflation higher than 6.5 percent may negatively affect
economic growth in Nepal. Therefore, for supporting to achieve high and
sustainable economic growth along with maintaining the price and external
sector stability, monetary policy accords a priority to mobilize resources in
sectors where prospectus of building capital is high and expand the production
possibility frontier of the economy.

63.

Consumer price inflation in Nepal is still higher than India. In the context
of the fixed exchange rate regime with Indian currency and about twothird of the total imports come from India, Nepal's consumer price
inflation is generally influenced by Indian inflation. However, the role of
foreign currency reserves is equally important in controlling inflation for
the country like Nepal with weak export capacity and import-dependent
production and consumption structure. If the excessive expansion in the
aggregate demand deteriorates the import capacity of the available foreign
currency reserves, it also affects the domestic supply chain and the business
environment, leading to a higher inflation domestically despite of lower
inflation in neighbouring countries and around the world. Therefore, the
monetary policy has cautiously been formulated without putting undue
pressure on the foreign exchange reserve and the exchange rate peg from
excessive rise in domestic demand.

64.

The monetary policy of 2022/23 has started the provision of not setting the
policy rate below the annual expected inflation. There is also a practice of
taking the natural rate of interest as a reference, to keep the policy rate at
a desired level. While the natural rate of interest rate cannot be measured
directly, the average long-run inflation can be considered as a good estimator
among the available statistical and econometric methods. Nepal's average
inflation for the last 25 years is 6.7 percent. On this basis, Nepal's natural
rate of interest can be assumed to be around 6.5 percent. In case the policy
rate is below the natural rate of interest, there could be undue pressure on the
external sector, and domestic economic activities could be suppressed in case

14

Nepal Rastra Bank

policy rate is above the natural rate. Therefore, while determining the policy
rate, the natural rate of interest is taken as a reference rate, in addition to
inflation and external sector outlook.
65.

Gross domestic saving has remained below 10 percent of GDP for a very long
period in Nepal. The lower domestic saving but higher investment demand
has been increasing the resource gap. International competitiveness has not
increased due to the lower productivity of public and private sector investment
while the investment multiplier and the domestic saving rate is also at very
low level. For increasing the saving rate, the rate of capital formation needs
to be increased by mobilising the public and private investment towards
the sectors with a higher return. In this context, a strategy of maintaining a
positive real interest rate on deposits to promote saving has been followed
while setting the policy rate.

66.

Private sector credit to GDP ratio is very high in Nepal compared to the South
Asian region. Nepalese private sector seems to be in an over-indebted situation
when the total lending from BFIs, cooperatives, insurance companies, Citizen
Investment Trust and Employee Provident Fund is considered together. The
non-performing loan has started to increase due to the private sector's overindebtedness, the poor relationship between the credit and real sector, and
some non-professional activities targeted against the financial sector in recent
days. In this background, the utmost priority has been given to maintaining
financial stability.

67.

The banking sector's average credit growth has registered 19.4 percent in the
last 20 years. Along with the rise of the private sector credit to GDP ratio, the
number of larger size loans has also grown. However, the growth of the real
sector is less than expected compared to the credit flow to this sector. When
the financial sector expands but not the real sector, it not only affects the
financial stability through poor financial asset quality but also deteriorates the
real sector and government finance in the long run. Therefore, the emphasis
has been given to enhancing the productive usage of the credit than its growth,
priority to small and medium productive sector loans, and reducing the overconcentration of the credit.

68.

The market supply chain disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the
Russia-Ukraine war is yet to come in normal order. The higher inflationary
pressure in both developed and developing countries built mainly through the

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 15

elevated petroleum and food prices has been improving slowly but the overall
inflation level is still much higher than their targeted level. As a consequence,
the majority of the central banks have been continuing the tight monetary
policy stance. As a result, pressure in the financial sector of both emerging
and developing economies still continues. The policy stance around the world
has also been considered while formulating this monetary policy.

Monetary Policy Stance
69.

The stance of monetary policy has been kept cautiously accommodative to
make the economy buoyant by maintaining price and external sector stability.

70.

The priority of the monetary policy is to enhance the domestic production
capacity by channelling financial resources to the productive sector.

71.

Regulatory policies have been formulated for supporting the monetary
policy to maintain financial stability by enhancing the effectiveness of the
monitoring, regulation and supervision of large-scale credit, reducing the
over-concentration of the credit, prioritising small and medium-productive
sector credit and enhancing the quality as well as accessibility to the credit.

Monetary Policy Framework and Targets
72.

The exchange rate peg of the Nepalese Rupee vis-a-vis the Indian Rupee as a
nominal anchor of the monetary policy has been kept unchanged.

73.

The weighted average interbank rate among the BFIs has been continued as
an operating target of the monetary policy.

74.

The policy rate will be determined based on the import capacity of the foreign
exchange reserves and the annual expected inflation.

75.

Based on the status of the operating target, the interbank rate will be kept
within the interest rate corridor by proactively conducting open market
operations.

76.

The goal of the monetary policy is to keep the foreign exchange reserves
at a level that is sufficient to cover at least 7 months' imports of goods and
services.

77.

To contain the inflation within 6.5 percent, monetary management will be
carried out so that monetary expansion will not put pressure on the price
level.

16

Nepal Rastra Bank

78.

Priority is given to channelize financial resources towards the productive
sector and thereby support achieving the economic growth of 6 percent
targeted by the GoN in the budget for 2023/24. The growth rate of the broad
money supply and the credit to the private sector from the BFIs is projected
to be 12.5 percent and 11.5 percent respectively in 2023/24.

Monetary Measures
79.

Considering the domestic and external economic outlook, the policy rate
has been reduced by 50 basis points to 6.5 percent. Keeping the bank rate
unchanged at 7.5 percent, the deposit collection rate has been reduced to 4.5
percent from 5.5 percent.

80.

Secondary open market operations and deposit collection auction will be
opened if the weighted average interbank rate, taken as an operating target,
becomes higher than the bank rate and lower than the deposit collection rate.

81.

The provision of providing a standing liquidity facility (SLF) at the bank
rate and an overnight liquidity facility (OLF) at the policy rate has been kept
unchanged.

82.

A provision will be made to provide the standing deposit facility (SDF) at the
lower bound of the interest rate corridor in order to make IRC more effective.

83.

Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) have
been kept unchanged.

Financial Sector and Foreign Exchange Policies for 2023/24
84.

The size of the financial sector and financial outreach have been remarkably
improved as a result of the reforms being continuously implemented by the
NRB for the development and expansion of the financial sector. Adoption of
the international best practices and their effective implementation have been
a priority for the stability of the financial sector. BFIs have been consolidated
through raising their capital base as well as mergers and acquisitions. As a
result, the capital fund mobilized by the BFIs has reached about 13 percent
of the GDP, while the mobilization of financial resources has reached about
Rs.5700 billion in mid-July 2023.

85.

Working capital guideline is now in implementation in order to enhance the
utilization of financial resources with the objective of promoting financial

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 17

stability. A separate large exposure framework is being prepared to supervise big
borrowers effectively. Likewise, a revision of single obligor limit underscores
a top priority to reduce credit concentration and promote small and medium
productive enterprises. Similarly, reform initiatives like assessing the quality
of assets in the banking sector, reducing credit risk, developing and using the
supervisory information systems to enhance supervisory capacity, preparing
and implementing the macro stress testing framework to assess the pressure
that financial sector may face due to the macroeconomic fluctuations, timely
reviewing and amending the laws related to the financial sector, among
others, have been continued. It is expected that afore-mentioned reforms will
promote financial stability and help achieve sustainable economic growth.
86.

The current account of the external sector has been made fully convertible
to enhance market access and integrate Nepal's market with the international
market, while the capital account has also been gradually opened up on a
need basis. Foreign exchange policy has been formulated and implemented
to harmonise it with monetary and financial sector policies to enhance the
productive use of foreign exchange reserves.

87.

Physical infrastructure, legal and regulatory measures related to payments and
settlements have been developed to make electronic payments simple, safe
and effective. In addition, the usage of modern equipment and technology
has been emphasized to promote electronic payments by integrating with
international gateways. There has been a significant expansion in the payments
and settlement of electronic transactions due to these initiatives.

88.

In line with the monetary policy stance for 2023/24, the following legal,
regulatory and foreign exchange management as well as payment systemrelated policies have been formulated.

Regulation and Supervision
89.

Necessary amendment process to the existing Banking Offence Act 2007
will be moved forward including the provisions for controlling the nonprofessional and violent activities affecting the financial sector stability.

90.

The directives related to anti-money laundering will be issued based on the
suggestions received from the mutual evaluation, among others. Similarly,
the necessary amendments to the related laws and formulation of a national
strategy will be facilitated.

18

Nepal Rastra Bank

91.

The limit of the first residential home loan will be increased from Rs.15
million to Rs.20 million.

92.

The current provision of providing at least one percentage point additional
interest rate by BFIs for remittance account opened by Nepali people working
abroad has been continued.

93.

The Working Capital Guideline will be reviewed on the basis of the suggestions
received from the BFIs.

94.

Stressed Loan Resolution Framework will be issued by incorporating
the measures and procedures to be followed for the loan rescheduling,
rehabilitation and other management of the borrowers who are in problem
due to the natural disaster or other special circumstances.

95.

Asset Quality Review of commercial banks will be conducted and the
guideline for Internal Credit Risk Grading of the BFIs will be formulated and
implemented.

96.

National level development banks will be required to fully comply the Capital
Adequacy Framework, 2015.

97.

Necessary policy will be formulated to implement the Expected Credit Loss
(ECL) Model as per the National Financial Reporting Standards (NFRS).

98.

Provisions of lending requirement to the specified sectors will be reviewed by
analysing the current situation of the credit flow.

99.

As per the budget statement of GoN for 2023/24, the provision of compulsory
requirement of Permanent Account Number (PAN) for the borrowers who
utilize the credit above certain limit from the BFIs will be reviewed.

100. Existing investment-related provisions will be reviewed to facilitate the
investment of the BFIs to Private Equity Fund/Venture Capital Fund approved
by the Securities Board of Nepal.
101. Necessary coordination will be made with other related agencies to develop a
credit scoring measurement system.
102. As per the the budget statement of the GoN for 2023/24, NRB will facilitate
to establish a separate specialised regulatory agency to effectively regulate
and supervise saving and credit cooperatives.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 19

103. To facilitate the exchange of information of customers among the BFIs
and other payment-related entities, necessary coordination will be made to
develop and implement a centralized Know Your Customer (KYC) system by
integrating with the National ID being issued by the GoN.
104. Financial Corporation Survey will be prepared and published to measure the
financial depth by incorporating the balance sheets of microfinance financial
institutions, insurance companies, Citizen Investment Trust, Employees
Provident Fund and other non-bank financial institutions in addition to the BFIs.
105. Considering the necessity of capable human resources and their performance
for the stability of the banking system, a study related to human resource
development and management in the banking sector will be conducted. A
provision will be made in which individuals should pass the entrance exam
to enter the banking service and personnel who have completed certification
courses from institutions like National Banking Institute will get priority for
further career development.
106. The existing risk weight of margin nature loans, real estate loans and hire
purchase loans will be reviewed.

Microfinance
107. Recommendations of the study report prepared by the committee formed
to study the problems and suggestions related to microfinance financial
institutions will be gradually implemented.
108. Merger and acquisition of microfinance financial institutions will be
promoted by availing the existing facilities for institutions who commence
joint operation by mid-July 2024.

Payment System
109. Further actions will be taken on the basis of the study done on the issuance of
Central Bank Digital Currency.
110. Collection of government revenue by using electronic payment instruments
in the major public service delivery offices will be facilitated.
111. The provision of receiving foreign currency through electronic means from
the export of information technology and other services will be made more
effective.

20

Nepal Rastra Bank

112. The transactions of the institutions involved in electronic payment will be
settled through the system of the NRB by synchronising in line with the
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI).

Foreign Exchange Management
113. As mentioned in the budget statement of the GoN for FY 2023/24, necessary
amendments will be made to 'Nepal Rastra Bank Foreign Investment and
Foreign Debt Management Bylaw' to simplify and facilitate the processes
related to foreign investment.
114. A provision will be made to provide the foreign currency exchange facility
through commercial banks up to a certain percentage of their foreign currency
earning made by the service exporting industry/businesses like information
technology based on the specified documents. Such a foreign exchange facility
will avail to establish contact offices in third countries, to make payments to
foreign entities/ transfer the funds to their bank accounts located abroad, and
to purchase software or programs and install the equipment.
115. The existing provisions related to the imports through the draft/TT and DAP/
DAA will be reviewed as necessary.
116. Necessary arrangements will be made to include the items identified by the
Nepal Integrated Trade Strategy in the existing lists of items eligible for backto-back letter of credit facility.
117. The existing provision of providing up to US Dollar 1,500 foreign exchange
twice a year as a passport facility to Nepalese travelling abroad other than
India will be revised to the US Dollar 2,500.
118. Necessary arrangements will be made to allow the air service providers to
pay the various service fees abroad up to one hundred thousand US Dollars or
other equivalent convertible foreign currency directly through licensed "A"
class commercial banks, on the approval/recommendation of the regulatory
body and presenting the other prescribed documents.
119. Since the spread and impact of Covid-19 has diminished, the existing provision
of allowing foreign currency denominated loans to be paid in Nepali rupees
will be removed.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 21

120. To manage the inherent foreign exchange risks of the external loan taken
by the BFIs with the approval of this bank, arrangements will be made to
introduce swap and other instruments based on the study done so far.

Finally,
121. The implementation of this policy is expected to promote macroeconomic
stability, enhance the productive use of financial resources, expand financial
access and help achieve the goal of high and sustainable economic growth.
122. Necessary revisions will be made in policies related to the monetary, financial
sector, payment system and foreign exchange management by doing quarterly
reviews of the economic and financial situation.
123. We would like to express our gratitude to all stakeholders including the
agencies of the GoN, organizations related to various businesses and industries,
BFIs, scholars, media and others for their support during the formulation
of monetary policy for 2023/24. The Bank expects continuous cooperation
from all stakeholders for the implementation of the provisions and programs
envisioned in this monetary policy.

Projection of Monetary Survey

Appendix -1

22
Nepal Rastra Bank

72

74

75

4

5

6

The target of the monetary policy is to support achieving
targeted economic growth only after maintaining adequate
foreign exchange reserves sufficient to cover the imports of
goods and services for up to 7 months and without having
demand side pressure on inflation.
Considering the pressure on prices and foreign exchange
reserves, and to ensuring macroeconomic stability, the rates
under the interest rate corridor increased by 1.5 percentage
points. Accordingly, the bank rate increased to 8.5 percent, the
policy rate to 7.0 percent, and the deposit collection rate to 5.5
percent.
A mechanism to be developed to open a repo/reverse repo
auction if the interbank rate deviates from the policy rate by
more than 2 percentage points. Likewise, a provision to be
made to open the deposit collection auction if the interbank rate
decreases by more than 3 percentage points from the policy rate.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
1
70
The main basis for setting the policy rate to be the capacity of
foreign exchange reserve to cover the imports of goods and
services and inflation. The policy rate to be set not less than the
annual expected inflation.
2
71
Liquidity to be managed by conducting open market operations
based on the situation of the operating target.
3
71
In FY 2022/23, the projected growth rate of the broad money
supply to be 12 percent, and credit to the private sector to be
12.6 percent.

The "Nepal Rastra Bank Open Market Operation Bylaw,
2022" and "Nepal Rastra Bank Open Market Operation
Procedure, 2022" amended and implemented accordingly.

Circular issued on 3 August 2022.

On y-o-y basis, broad money supply and credit to the
private sector increased 10.9 percent and 3.6 percent
respectively in mid-June 2023. The weighted average
interbank rate of BFIs stood at 6.69 percent during midJune to mid-July 2023.
The foreign exchange reserve stood at NPR 1480.87 billion
(USD 11.30 billion) in mid-June 2023. Such reserve is
sufficient to cover the import of goods and services for 9.6
months.

Implementation Status
The foreign exchange reserve is sufficient to cover the
import of goods and services for 9.6 months in mid-June
2023. The average inflation rate stood at 7.77 percent
during the eleven months of FY 2022/23.
The liquidity management done regularly.

Appendix-2
Progress Matrix of Programs Provisioned in Monetary Policy for 2022/23

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 23

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
7
76
In order to make liquidity management more effective, an
The Board of Directors of the NRB approved the "Nepal
open market operation stabilization fund to be established and
Rastra Bank, Open Market Operation Stabilization Fund
implemented as stipulated in the budget statement for 2022/23. Guidelines, 2023" on 10 April 2023.
8
77
For making the payment system easy and reliable, the existing
"Nepal Rastra Bank, Daily Liquidity Facility Procedure,
intraday liquidity facility availed by this bank to the BFIs on the 2022" approved and implemented effective from 16
collateral of government securities will be made available for
December 2022. The third amendment of the procedure
the overnight period on a need basis. Such a facility to be made approved and is effective from 8 May 2023.
available at the bank rate.
"Nepal Rastra Bank Open Market Operation Bylaw, 2022"
9
78
Standing liquidity facility (SLF) to be available to the BFIs on
the collateral of securities specified by the NRB for a maximum and "Nepal Rastra Bank Open Market Operation Procedure,
period of 5 days at the bank rate. The outstanding SLF to be no 2022" amended and are in place. In FY 2022/23, BFIs
more than 1 percent of the total local currency deposits held by utilised the SLF facility amounting to Rs.2727.11 billion.
the bank in the previous week.
"Nepal Rastra Bank Lender of Last Resort Policy, 2011"
10
79
The BFIs that are unable to manage liquidity through the
interbank market, daily liquidity facility, open market operations, amended and “Nepal Rastra Bank Lender of Last Resort
and standing liquidity facility will be given Lender of Last
Bylaws, 2023” is effective from 12 March 2023.
Resort Facility at a penalty rate of 2 percentage points above the
bank rate if requested by the respective institution. A procedure
for the Lender of Last Resort Facility to be issued.
11
80
The cash reserve ratio to be maintained by the BFIs to be
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
increased by 1 percentage point to 4 percent with effect from 17
Being regularly monitored.
August 2022.
12
81
A provision to be made whereby the commercial banks need
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
to maintain the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) of 12 percent
Being regularly monitored.
and development banks, as well as finance companies, need to
maintain 10 percent from mid-January 2023.
13
82
In order to make the monetary policy transmission mechanism
Circular issued on 3 August 2022 and 8 May 2023.
more effective, the necessary review to be made in the existing
policy arrangements regarding the interest rate determination by
the BFIs.

24
Nepal Rastra Bank

88

89

90

19

20

21

The study to implement the sectoral Counter Cyclical
Capital buffer completed.
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.

Circular issued on 3 August 2022 aiming to implement
countercyclical capital buffer from FY 2023/24.

Financial Sector Stability Review (FSSR) with the
assistance of the IMF conducted and the report has been
received.

Annual Action Plan formulated and implemented in
accordance with the strategic plan.

Circular issued on 3 August 2022.

Implementation Status
Amendment drafts prepared.

A provision to be made to provide the existing merger-related
discounts and facilities if commercial banks and microfinance
financial institutions start integrated operations with the
institution of the same class or acquire the institutions of the
same class by mid-January 2023.
The existing provision for the BFIs allowing to include the
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
resources mobilized from debenture in deposits while calculating
the credit to deposit ratio to be continued until mid-July 2023.
Large Exposure Framework to be developed to identify the
Large Exposure Framework prepared.
large-scale borrowers from the BFIs.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
14
83
Necessary actions to be taken to forward the amendment
proposals of banking acts and laws including Nepal Rastra Bank
Act, 2002, Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 2017, Foreign
Exchange (Regulating) Act, 1962, and Payments and Settlement
Act, 2019.
15
84
Necessary review to be made in the regulatory provisions such
as loan restructuring and rescheduling, interest capitalization,
and dividend distribution introduced to speed up the economic
revival during the Covid-19 pandemic.
16
85
The policies and programs incorporated in the fourth strategic
plan and financial sector development strategy of this bank to be
implemented effectively.
17
86
Financial Sector Stability Review (FSSR) is being carried out
with the assistance of the IMF. Suggestions obtained from this
report to be gradually implemented to improve the quality of
loans and maintain financial stability.
18
87
Necessary arrangements to be made to implement the provision
of Counter-Cyclical Capital Buffer from mid-July 2023 which
has been suspended from 2019/20 due to the COVID-19
pandemic.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 25

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
22
90
Monitoring of the credits usage by the big borrowers from the
Regularly monitored.
banking system to be made more effective. The existing single
SOL will be reviewed based on the findings of the study.
obligor limit to be reviewed.
23
91
Macro Stress Testing Framework to be formulated and
Macro Stress Testing Framework developed.
implemented to test the impact of fluctuations in macroeconomic variables on the banking sector.
Implementation difficulties observed while coordinating
24
92
A provision to be made where the insurance claim must cover
the loan amount while doing insurance of the collateralized
with the concerned regulatory agency.
assets by the BFIs.
25
93
A provision to be made where businesses and enterprises
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
availing a maximum of Rs.50 million loans from the BFIs to be
waived from penal interest if they pay the principal and interest
due on mid-July 2022 by mid-Oct 2022.
26
94
Interest rate to be differentiated for credit disbursed to productive Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
and commercial sectors. To start with, a provision to be made
Regularly monitored.
for the BFIs whereby they can add a maximum of 2 percentage
points premium only, on their base rate while determining the
interest rate for the credit up to Rs.20 million provided to food
production, animal husbandry, fishery, export-related business
and productive enterprises using domestic raw materials.
27
95
A provision to be made to add a maximum of 2 percentage
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
points only on the base rate while determining the interest rate
for the credit provided to the private sectors for the construction
of information technology and industrial park.
28
96
A provision to be made whereby the BFIs must maintain loan to Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
value ratio at a maximum of 30 percent inside Kathmandu Valley
and a maximum of 40 percent outside Kathmandu Valley while
providing loans with no specific purpose, against the collateral of
land and house such as overdraft loans, mortgage loans, property
loan, and personal term loan.

26
Nepal Rastra Bank

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
29
97
In order to increase the investment capacity of the Nepal
Coordination is going on with the stakeholders.
Infrastructure Development Bank established to invest in the
infrastructure sector, it is to be encouraged to increase paid-up
capital through mergers and acquisitions with other financial
institutions established and operating with similar objectives.
Necessary provisions are made in the "Mergers and
30
98
The existing regulations issued by this bank regarding the
Acquisitions of Bank and Financial Institutions
suspension of security transactions at the time of bank mergers
and acquisitions to be repealed. Provisions regarding such
Regulations, 2016 (with fifth amendment 2022)" issued on
suspension to be as per the regulations of the Securities Board of 13 October 2022.
Nepal.
31
99
A limit for the margin type of loan against the collateral of
Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
shares from a single financial institution or all institutions to be
Regularly monitored.
set at Rs.120 million per borrower.
32
100
Risk weight for loans against the collateral of shares up to Rs.2.5 Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
million to be reduced to 100 percent while the risk weight for
Regularly monitored.
loans above this limit to be kept unchanged at 150 percent.
33
101
Necessary coordination to be made with the concerned agencies Coordination is going on.
for strengthening the international coordination mechanism for
the prevention of investment in money laundering and terrorist
activities.
Coordination is going on.
34
102
Necessary facilitation to be done regarding the establishment
of the second-tier regulatory institution (STI), as stated in the
budget for FY 2022/23, for effective regulation, inspection,
and supervision of savings and loan cooperatives and nongovernmental organizations that are outside the supervisory
scope of this bank.
35
103
Necessary support to be provided to make the regulation,
Coordination is going on regularly.
inspection, and supervision provisions of saving and credit
cooperatives effective.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 27

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
36
104
In order to encourage Green Financing, a draft of Green
Inception report submitted in the process of preparing the
Taxonomy to be prepared by including the topics such as issuing draft has been approved.
green bonds, reporting climate risks, identifying capital needs,
among others.
37
105
‘Foreign Investment and Foreign Debt Management Regulations, The Nepal Rastra Bank Board amended the bylaw on 17
2021' to be amended for facilitating the issues including more
January 2023 and effective from 27 January 2023.
automated foreign direct investment, repatriation of profits of
branch offices, and repatriation to other countries.
38
106
To facilitate the mobilisation of external commercial borrowing Circular issued on 15 August 2022.
by the BFIs, the existing policy provisions related to derivatives
to be reviewed for managing foreign exchange risk.
39
107
In order to widen the scope of remittance flow into Nepal,
Circular issued on 15 August 2022.
the existing remittance arrangements to be reviewed so that it
will be easier for Nepali citizens and organizations to receive
remittances from Nepali citizens living abroad, foreign citizens,
and associations/organizations located abroad.
40
108
Necessary coordination to be made with the relevant agencies of Continuously coordinated with the concerned agencies.
the GoN to provide various services and facilities based on the
proof of remitting money through a formal channel. In addition,
coordination to be made to ensure that Nepalese going abroad
for foreign employment have a bank account to receive foreign
exchange facilities.
Circular issued on 15 August 2022.
41
109
Necessary arrangements to be made so that holders of various
electronic and digital cards existing in banking payment devices
issued by Nepali BFIs can receive card-to-card remittance
transfers from a similar type of cards issued by foreign banks.
42
110
Necessary provisions to be made to encourage receiving foreign Circular issued on 22 March 2023.
exchange earnings through service exports including information
technology.

28
Nepal Rastra Bank

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
43
111
The existing provision of cash margin to be maintained while
The provision of cash margin while opening a letter of
opening a letter of credit for the import of certain items will be
credit was repealed through Circular issued on 19 January
gradually reviewed.
2023.
44
112
Arrangement to be made for the BFIs to issue a draft, T.T., or
Circular issued on 15 August 2022.
letter of credit for the import of goods only after analyzing the
price of the international market and the pro-forma price of
related goods.
45
113
A provision to be made whereby the employees directly involved Circular issued on 3 August 2022.
in trade finance and credit disbursement in the BFIs should
receive regular training on the methods of import-export of
goods and services, the payment methods used in it, basic issues
related to credit analysis, and other related issues.
46
114
A study to be carried out regarding the USD/NPR swap by
Study completed.
the NRB with the commercial banks to manage the risk in the
foreign exchange market.
47
115
Refinance facility to be continued limiting such facility to
The provisions are incorporated on "Nepal Rastra Bank
productive sectors including agriculture, small enterprises,
Refinance Procedure, 2020 (with the fifth amendment)
issued on 12 February 2023.
exports, and those sectors that are hard hit by the COVID-19.
Such a facility to be gradually reduced to the amount available in
the refinance fund by mid-July 2024.
48
116
Programs related to subsidized loans stated in the budget
The procedure is yet to be reviewed by the GoN.
statement of FY 2022/23 to be implemented as per the
procedures approved by the GoN.
49
117
A study to be carried out regarding the use and effectiveness
The effectiveness study is ongoing.
of the programs aimed at increasing credit flows to productive
sectors such as the refinance facilities, concessional loans,
deprived sector loans, and others.
50
118
A study to be carried out regarding the alternative forms of
Initial draft report of the study prepared.
finance such as Peer-to-peer lending and Crowdfunding in order
to increase the access of start-up businesses to credit.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 29

57

124

A study regarding the establishment of the Innovation Centre/
Regulatory Sandbox to be carried out.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
51
119
As per the budget statement of FY 2022/23, microfinance
financial institutions to be encouraged to provide financial
services in remote and backward areas in accordance with the
social banking concept.
52
120
Provisions to be made for the BFIs not to charge more than 2
percentage points premium on the base rate while determining
the interest rate on wholesale loans to the MFIs, under the
deprived sector lending.
53
121
Arrangements to be made for the MFIs to mobilise resources by
issuing debentures equal to their capital fund.
54
122
Necessary facilitation to be made for the capital restructuring
and institutional capacity improvement of ‘Grameen Bikash
Microfinance Financial Institution', which has government
investment too, after its restructuring as stated in the budget of
FY 2022/23.
55
123
NRB to facilitate the implementation of ‘Microfinance Fund' in
its legal, institutional as well as operational structure, as stated
in the budget of FY 2022/23 for the purpose of expanding credit
outreach to the agriculture sector.
56
124
Necessary institutional coordination to be made to celebrate FY
2022/23 as an ‘Electronic Payment Promotion Year'.
The Payment System Department which works as a
secretariat of the National Payment Board submitted the
proposal to the Board to conduct various programs and
directions have been received. The department coordinated
with various government/non-government agencies and the
BFIs as per the directions.
Study Report is ready.

Suggestion provided.

Facilitated as required.

Circular issued on 3 August 2022.

Regularly monitored.

Circular issued on 3 August 2022.

Implementation Status
Addressed through some regulatory provisions like
contribution to corporate social responsibility fund and
publication of the base rate.

30
Nepal Rastra Bank

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
Implementation Status
58
125
Necessary steps to be taken to establish a Complete Digital Bank Concept paper is prepared.
as stated in the budget of FY 2022/23. For this, necessary actions
Draft proposals of amendment on the Nepal Rastra Bank
to be taken to amend the Nepal Rastra Bank Act, 2002, the
Act, 2002 and Bank and Financial Institutions Act, 2017
Bank and Financial Institutions Act, 2017, and to prepare other
prepared.
necessary laws and institutional structures.
The existing licensing policy reviewed and “Licensing
59
126
The existing licensing policy to be reviewed by incorporating
Policy for Institutions Performing Payment Related Works,
the merger and acquisition of the institutions licensed to carry
out payment transactions, bringing foreign investment up to the 2023” is in place.
specified limit, among others
60
127
Arrangements to be made to settle the transactions paid with
The provision reviewed and amendment made on Directive
various cards issued by licensed BFIs within the country. For
1(6) of the Unified Directives issued to the institutions
this purpose, a provision to be made for the BFIs to issue
licensed to perform the payment-related works.
security bonds/guarantees in Nepali currency rather than in
foreign currency.
61
128
‘Cyber and Information Security Guideline' to be issued for the Draft of the ‘Cyber and Information Security Guideline'
institutions licensed to carry out payment-related transactions.
prepared.
62
129
Financial Inclusion Index to be prepared to measure the actual
The preliminary ‘Financial Inclusion Index' prepared.
status of the financial access.
63
130
‘Financial Literacy Framework, 2022' to be prepared including ‘Financial Literacy Framework' issued.
financial customer protection, digital financial literacy, and
financial literacy training guidelines.
Coordination is being done.
64
130
Necessary coordination to be made with the Government of
Nepal, Ministry of Education, Curriculum Development Center
to include the financial literacy-related topics in the school-level
curriculum.

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 31

55

56

57

58

3.

4.

5.

6.

Circular issued on 14 December 2022. From mid-July 2023,
the spread rate shall not exceed 4.0 percent for commercial
banks and 4.6 percent for development banks and finance
companies.

Implementation Status
Circular issued on 14 December 2022.

The premium provision also to be regulatory monitored.
Regularly monitored during off-site supervision.
A provision to be made for Microfinance Financial Institutions to Circular issued on 14 December 2022.
publish the base rate from mid-January 2023 on a monthly basis
Review to be made on the penalty provision to the BFIs for non- Circular issued on 14 December 2022.
maintaining the specified Credit- Deposit Ratio also based on
liquidity risk.
The existing working capital loan guidelines to be reviewed
“Working Capital Loan Guideline, 2022 (with the first
based on the received suggestions.
amendment) issued on 4 January 2023.
In view of the liquidity stress, a provision to be made to impose Circular issued on 14 December 2022.
a penalty from mid-January 2024 based on lending in mid-July
2023, if the BFIs fail to provide loans in the specified sectors.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
A provision to be made to count the investments made by the
1.
53
BFIs in the bonds related to the agricultural sector and issued
by public limited companies in the secondary market, in the
minimum lending requirement for that sector.
Provision to be made to maintain the interest rate spread of 4
2.
54
percent for commercial banks from 4.4 percent and the spread of
4.6 percent for development banks and finance companies from
5 percent.

Progress Matrix of Programs Provisioned in the First Quarter Review
of Monetary Policy for 2022/23

32
Nepal Rastra Bank

63

64

65

3.

4.

5.

In order to facilitate the operation of small and medium size
industry/business, the performing loan up to Rs.20 million in
mid-January 2023 to be allowed to restructure or reschedule by
the end of mid-July 2023, after the proper analysis of the cash
flow and income of the industry/business.
In order to further strengthen the credit quality of the BFIs, a
provision to be made to re-classify the non-performing loan
under the existing credit classification and provisioning system based on the international best practices, into the pass and
watch-list category, as soon as the loan instalment is regularized.
The monitoring of the average interest rate spread to be maintained between lending and deposit rates by the BFIs as well
as the premium to be charged to the borrowers be made more
effective.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
1.
60
Provision to be made to provide the overnight liquidity facility
under the daily liquidity facility to the BFIs at the policy rate of 7
percent which is being provided at the bank rate of 8.5 percent.
2.
62
Provision to be made for not to impose the penal interest for
up to mid-June 2023 if the borrower pays the principal/interest
liability within one month of the overdue.

On-site and off-site monitoring done regularly.

Review process is undergoing.

Regularly monitored as per the provisions of restructuring
and rescheduling.

Regularly monitored during the on-site inspection whether
penal interest is waived or not.
Circular issued on 24 February, 2023.

Implementation Status
‘Nepal Rastra Bank, Daily Liquidity Facilities Procedure’ is
amended and the provision is effective from 16 December
2022.
Circular issued on 24 February 2023.

Progress Matrix of Programs Provisioned in the Mid-Term Review of
Monetary Policy for 2022/23

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 33

60

61

62

63

3.

4.

5.

6

Based on the data published by the National Statistics Office,
a provision to be made to provide the refinance facilities up to
the limit of the fund to the borrowers of the sectors that have
experienced negative growth in the last two quarters.
Observing the downturn to the real sector of the economy, BFIs
to be allowed to restructure/ reschedule the loans provided to
hotels and restaurants, animal husbandry, construction sector
and loans up to Rs.5 million of other sectors too, based on the
analysis of the borrower’s cash flow, rational and the need, up to
mid-July 2023.
Observing the downturn to the real sector causing difficulty in
repaying the loan, a provision to be made to extend short-term
and working capital loans for up to 3 months by mid-July 2023
without charging any kind of penalty/fee if the interest payment
is regular, based on the rational and need.
Observing the downturn to the real sector causing difficulty in
repaying the loan by the borrowers of microfinance financial
institutions, a provision to be made to allow restructuring/
rescheduling the loan by mid-July 2023, on the basis of rational
and need.

S.N. Point No.
Objectives/Programs
The existing bank rate reduced by 1 percentage point to 7.5
1.
57
percent.
The existing provision of counting the bonds issued by the BFIs
2.
59
as a resource (deposit) to calculate the credit-deposit ratio to be
continued up to mid-January 2024.

Circular issued on 24 May 2023.

Circular issued on 17 May 2023.
Regularly monitored during the on-site inspection whether
penalty/fee is charged or not.

Circular issued on 17 May 2023.
Regularly monitored both on-site and off-site based on the
provision of restructuring and rescheduling.

Implementation Status
Implemented along with the third quarter review of
monetary policy.
Circular issued on 17 May 2023.
Bonds are counted as a resource for the credit-deposit ratio
calculation.
Refinance Procedure, 2020 (Sixth Amendment) issued on
23 May 2023.

Progress Matrix of Programs Provisioned in the Third Quarter Review of
Monetary Policy for 2022/23

34
Nepal Rastra Bank

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 35

List of Statistical Tables
Table 1

Gross Domestic Product (at 2010/11 Prices)

Table 2

Table 4

Gross Domestic Product (at Current Prices)
Gross National Income, Investment and Saving (at
Current Prices)
National Consumer Price Index (2014/15=100)

Table 5

Monetary Survey

Table 6

Monetary Survey (Year on Year)

Table 7

Structure of Interest Rates

Table 8

Monetary Management

Table 9

Repo Auction

Table 10

Outright Purchase Auction

Table 11

Reverse Repo Auction

Table 12

Deposit Collection Auction

Table 13

Interest Rate Corridor

Table 14

Standing Liquidity Facility

Table 15

Overnight Liquidity Facility

Table 16

Government Budgetary Operation

Table 17

Outstanding Domestic Debt of Government of Nepal

Table 18

Net Domestic Borrowing of Government of Nepal

Table 19

Direction of Foreign Trade

Table 20

Balance of Payments

Table 21

Gross Foreign Assets of the Banking Sector

Table 22

Purchase/Sale of Foreign Currency

Table 3

Table 1

(At 2010/11 Price)

Gross Domestic Product

36
Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 2

(At Current Price)

Gross Domestic Product

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 37

Table 3

(At Current Prices)

Gross National Income, Investment and Saving

38
Nepal Rastra Bank

(2014/15 = 100)
(y-o-y)

National Consumer Price Index

Table 4

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 39

Table 5

Monetary Survey

40
Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 6

Monetary Survey
(Year on Year)

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 41

Table 7

Structure of Interest Rate

42
Nepal Rastra Bank

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 43

Table 8

Monetary Management

Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 9

Repo Auction

44

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 45

Table 10

Outright Purchase Auction

Table 11

Reverse Repo Auction

46
Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 12

Deposit Collection Auction

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 47

Table 13

Interest Rate Corridor

48
Nepal Rastra Bank

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 49

Table 14

Standing Liquidity Facility

50

Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 15

Overnight Liquidity Facility#

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 51

Table 16

Government Budgetary Operation
(Based on banking transactions)
(Based on the data of End of 4th week of Asar)+

52

Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 17

Outstanding Domestic Debt of Government of Nepal

Table 18

Net Domestic Borrowing of Government of Nepal

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 53

54

Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 19

Direction of Foreign Trade*

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 55

Table 20

Balance of Payments

56

Nepal Rastra Bank

Table 21

Gross Foreign Assets of the Banking Sector

Table 22

Purchase/Sale of Foreign Currency

Monetary Policy for 2023/24 57

Nepal Rastra Bank
Central Office
Baluwatar, Kathmandu
Nepal

Phone: 01-4410158
Website: www.nrb.org.np

